Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Autonomous Intelligent
https://doi.org/10.1007/s43684-021-00015-x
Systems
ORIGINAL ARTICLE Open Access
Decision making framework for
autonomous vehicles driving behavior in
complex scenarios via hierarchical state
machine
Xuanyu Wang, Xudong Qi, Ping Wang* and Jingwen Yang
Abstract
With the development ofautonomous car, a vehicle is capable to sense its environment more precisely. That allows
improved drving behavior decision strategyto be used for more safety and effectiveness incomplex scenarios.In
this paper, a decision making framework based on hierarchical state machine is proposedwith a top-down
structure of three-layer finite state machinedecision system. The upper layer classifiesthedriving scenariobased on
relative position ofthe vehicle and itssurrounding vehicles. The middle layer judges theoptimal driving behavior
according to the improved energy efficiency function targetedatmultiple criteria including driving efficiency, safety
and the grid-based lane vacancy rate. The lower layer constructs thestate transition matrix combined with the
calculation results of the previous layer to predict the optimal passway intheregion. The simulation results show
that the proposed driving strategy can integrate multiple criteria to evaluate theenergy efficiency value of vehicle
behavior inreal time, and realize the selection of optimal vehicle drivingstrategy. With popularity of automatic
vehicles infuture,the driving strategy can be used as a reference to provideassistance for human drive or even the
real-time decision-making of autonomous driving.
Keywords: Decision making, Autonomous Car, Energy efficiency function, State machine
1 Introduction information of vehicles, and a grid model is proposed to
Due to the improvement of vehicle perception technol- represent the driving environment. Yang et al. [3] pro-
ogy, the ability of vehicles to obtain the surrounding en- posed Video-based spatial distribution data of vehicles
vironment information in complex scenarios is far more togeneratefine-grainedfusion methods.
than human drivers, so the current auxiliary driving sys- In the actual driving process of automatic vehicles, a
tem is considered to be an effective way to improve the decision-making system plays an important role in auto-
driving efficiency and driving safety of vehicles. For driv- matic driving when facing the complex external environ-
ing environment perception, many methods have been ment and changing traffic state. Therefore, scholars
proposed, Oh et al. [1] proposed a fast occupancy grid from all walks of life have proposed a variety of methods
filtering method using a grid state diagram, and esti- to solve the problem of autonomous decision-making of
mated the occupancyprobability ofeachcellbyBayesian automatic vehicles, based on the current research re-
filtering method. Sivaraman et al. [2] used lidar and sults, it can be argued that the behavioural decision-
front camera to obtain 360-degree environment making techniques for autonomous vehicles fall into two
main directions: rule-based decision-making and
learning-based decisions. Decision-making models based
*Correspondence:wang0372@e.ntu.edu.sg
SchoolofElectronicsandControlEngineering,Chang’anUniversity,Xi’an on learning statistics are able to take full account of the
710064,China
©TheAuthor(s).2021OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,
whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproductioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyougive
appropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktotheCreativeCommonslicence,andindicateif
changesweremade.Theimagesorotherthirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincludedinthearticle'sCreativeCommons
licence,unlessindicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial.Ifmaterialisnotincludedinthearticle'sCreativeCommons
licenceandyourintendeduseisnotpermittedbystatutoryregulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,youwillneedtoobtain
permissiondirectlyfromthecopyrightholder.Toviewacopyofthislicence,visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page2of12
possible uncertainties of autonomous vehicle driving in vehiclefollowing,obstacleavoidance,andsoon.Thisex-
complex environments. Yuan et al. [4] proposed a pre- pands the application scope of the finite state machine
processing method with specified time-frequency rules is and makes the system clearer. Therefore, more scholars
proposed for more efficient traffic control. Wang et al. applied vehicle behavior as a sub-state in the finite state
[5] used integration of travel speed, traffic flow and rain- machine to form a hierarchical state machine [19]. In
fall intensity through the proposed deep belief-radial addition, the layered finite state machineisusedto assist
basis function network to predict travel speedFor ex- vehicle decision-making. Gindele [20] divided the state
ample, Markov model is a predictive control model, machine into three layers, wherein the concurrent lay-
which can take some uncertain factors into account, it is ered state machine online selection is used to select the
often used to improve the accuracy of automatic vehicle operation needed to complete the task. Although the
behavior decisions [6]. Wei et al. used Markov model to Hierarchical finite state machine can adapt to most sce-
consider perceptual constraints and surrounding vehicle narios, due to the inevitable uncertainty in the real traf-
behavior as attributes to make decisions, which im- fic scenarios, the state transfer between layers is very
proved the stability of automatic vehicles in a single lane important and can be further improved [21]. While, few
[7]. Brechtel et al. combined the continuous state hier- papers put driving efficiency, driving safety, Lane idle
archicalBayesiantransitionmodelwithMarkovDecision rate and other factors into the condition of state transi-
Process (MDP) model to realize that the automatic ve- tion, so we consider a variety of evaluation indexes com-
hicle can make reasonable decisions in the multi-lane bined with a hierarchical state machine to make the
scene [8]. Brechtel et al. took driving decision as a autonomous vehicle and make safe and effective deci-
method to solve continuous state Partially Observable sionsontherealroad.
Markov Decision Process (POMDP) [9]. In addition, The research focus of this paper is to design an auto-
much progress has been made in research work on deep matic driving decision framework including driving
reinforcement learning-based decision models, the driv- safetyanddrivingefficiencybasedontheexistingvehicle
ing behavior decision system developed by the NVIDIA perception information and the actual road conditions.
company uses an end-to-end neural network [10]. Intel We propose a hierarchical finite state machine model
company uses the existing control data trainingnetwork, with a top-down structure of three-layer of vehicle be-
taking into account the vehicle straight, left turn, right havior decisions. Firstly, the traffic state of autonomous
turn andother control commands, realizes the execution vehicles interacting with other vehicles in urban roads is
of vehicle behavior such as turning while maintaining divided into 30 sub-scenes. These scenes are regarded as
the lane [11]. Wang et al. [12] used the successful pre- substates of the top layer of the state machine. The top
diction of traffic flows for heavy, medium and small ve- layer is used to judge the scene of automatic vehicles,
hicles contributes to safer and more efficient travel. and the state transition condition is judged according to
However, autonomous vehicle decision-making needs to thedistribution ofsurroundingvehicles,themiddlelayer
be real-time and accurate in complex traffic scenarios is used to evaluate the possible behaviors of automatic
[13]. rule-based decision models are real-time in nature vehicles in the current scene. Here, we divide the behav-
andmorefocused onachievingfunctional,eachbehavior iors of vehicles in any sub-scene into four categories:
ofvehicle can correspondto astate, somany researchers lane changing to the left, lane changing to the right, ac-
establish some rules to help automatic vehicles make de- celerating forward, and decelerating forward, using the
cisions, this methodisinline withthe logical thinkingof improved energy efficiency function, the energy effi-
the driver, at the same time, it can meet the traffic rules, ciency value of each vehicle behavior is calculated from
omit the cumbersome calculation process, and ensure the three aspects of safety, efficiency, and lane idleness.
real-time decision-making [14, 15]. Yang et al. [16] used The state machine set of the lower layer is composed of
an improved reinforcement learning method to find the four kinds of vehicle behaviors, and the vehicle state
best road trajectory. Zhao et al. designed a decision- evolution prediction matrix is introduced, Predict and
makingsystemusingtrafficrulesandpartofthemapin- judge the most reasonable vehicle behavior in the next
formation from the knowledge base to make real-time state, and execute the vehicle behavior. In summary, the
decisions at intersections [17]. In addition, hierarchical maincontributions ofthisworkare:
finite state machines are an excellent method and are
often used to assist in vehicle decision making because Proposedahierarchical finitestatemachine decision
of their unique hierarchical judgement structure, which frameworkwiththree-layer;
can be transferred to pre-set sub-states. Montemerlo Proposedanimprovedmulti-indicator energyefficiency
[18] subdivided the vehicle behavior and established a function;
limited state mechanism into decision-making system, in Thefeasibilityoftheproposedmethodisdemonstrated
which the states include: initial state, forward driving, through simulationexperiments;
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page3of12
The organizationalstructure ofthispaperisasfollows: anditsactionscanalsobeconsideredassomerulesused
Section 2 introduces the research status of vehicle be- to change the properties of the entity. The basic actions
havior decision-making and the innovation of research of the entity can be divided into two most basic driving
methods. In Section 3, the vehicle behavior decision behaviors,followingandlanechanging.
model based on a hierarchical finite state machine is de-
signed for different scenarios. Section 4 introduces the 2.2FSMmissionplanningmodel
construction of the simulation environment and the test The FSM model is established for autonomous vehicles
of the decision model and then analyzes and evaluates in straight lanes and the decisions of the state machine
theresults.Section 5summarizesthethesis. are divided into three layers. Such a decision framework
is expressed through collaboration between the three
2 Methodology layers, and depending on the actual traffic situation and
The realization of autonomous decision-making for au- vehicle state, a decision is made as to which specific ve-
tonomous vehicles is based on three decision layers [22]. hicle action to perform next, and all tasks are completed
This paper proposes a decision-making method for au- only when the decisions at each tier are completed. The
tonomous vehicles performance based on finite state FSMmodel hierarchy isshowninFig.1.
machines (FSM), which enables intelligent decision- The above behavior planning is a decision-making
making during driving and allows planning the next be- method based on a finite state machine model to decide
havior tobe performedby the vehicle based on real-time which specific task to perform in the task framework.
trafficdynamics. The three task layers can be specifically represented as a
The implementation of the autonomous driving task scenario decision, an energy efficiency assessment deci-
planning relies on the simulation of each traffic partici- sion and an execution action decision layer, which can
pating unit in a real traffic scenario, and then a three- make intelligent decisions when performing the task and
layer decision modelisusedto complete the final behav- can match theactual drivingsituation.
ior planning for each autonomous vehicle. The main A key issue in behavior planning is how to decide
problem of planning is to determinethe rulesfor driving on the next behavior based on the actual traffic situ-
decisions and the methods for implementing the deci- ation and the change of its own vehicle state, to
sionprocess. achieve the purpose of decision making and reason-
ing. The different states in the above decision frame-
2.1Vehiclemodelestablishment work are regarded as different situations of the
To establish an autonomous driving working condition autonomous vehicle in the actual traffic scenario, and
model and abstract a real autonomous vehicle, the basic are expressed in the specific decision method of the
features and behavior attributes used to describe the state machine: the first layer judges the scenario of
basic behavioral capabilities of the vehicle are extracted, the vehicle in the straight-line section by the distribu-
and all the basic features and attributes about the entity tion of the surrounding vehicles perceived by the au-
are described based on the vehicle dynamics structure, tonomous vehicle, the second layer evaluates and
Fig.1Tasknetworkdiagram
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page4of12
judges the potential vehicle behavior according to the 2.3Toplayerscenariodecision
divided scenario and its own vehicle state, and the Alltaskmodesinthetasknetworkrepresentdifferent fi-
third layer manifests itself in the form of specific be- nite states in a finite state machine. In the execution of
havior planning. This allows for real-time adjustments the task, to complete the decision, the traffic situation in
to be made based on the traffic situation and the different scenarios needs to be judged and the energy ef-
state of the vehicle itself, thus enabling consistent ficiency values of different vehicle behaviors during the
control and planning of the autonomous vehicle in driving process are evaluated by the corresponding indi-
straight sections. The quintet is defined as follows to cators in different autonomous driving scenarios to fi-
build a finite state machine decision model at each nally plan and predict the vehicle behaviors, thus
task level: establishing the state transition table of the FSM. Fig-
ure 2 below shows the typical scenario division decision
MðS;∑;f;S ;FÞ: ð1Þ of the top-layer state machine on the distribution of ve-
0
hicles around the perception of the self-driving vehicle.
Here, S means the set of states, in this paper, it can Accordingto thedistribution of vehicles around the per-
be expressed as a set of task points of all layers, at ception of the self-driving vehicle, all scenarios are di-
any certain moment, the FSM can only be in a cer- vided into three categories: no vehicle in front, no
tain state. Σ means the set of input events or all situ- vehicle on the side, and vehicle on the side, and subdi-
ations, the FSM can only receive a certain input at vided into sub-scenariosagain onthis basis.
any certain behavior. f means a mapping from S×Σ
to Σ, in a certain state, the FSM will switch to a new 2.4Middlelayerenergyefficiencyassessment
state determined by the state transition function after The traffic situation evaluation is performed after the
a given input, such as
f(S,R)=S′
means that the completion of the first layer of tasks. The evaluation re-
current mission is S, when the situation changed to sults are calculated by collecting the relevant attributes
R, the mission will transfer to the next mission S′ . S and execution of itself and the surrounding vehicles. By
0
is the initial state and F is the final state. analyzing all sub-scenarios, the energy efficiency values
Fig.2Scenariodecisionoftopstatemachine
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page5of12
for different potential behavior planning are calculated, to the moment of collision, we can establish the mini-
taking into account the safety, efficiency and lane avail- mumsafedistancemodel.
ability of the scenario the vehicle is in, and the vehicle According to the relationship between the positions of
behavior with the highest energy efficiency value is se- the two vehicles inFig. 3, we can establish thesafety dis-
lected byconditionaljudgement. tance conditiontoavoid thecollision:
The driving state of the vehicle can be divided into
3 kinds: the free driving state with the desired speed
ΔSþL
H
þS
H
⩾S
A
þL
H
cosθþW
H
sinθ; ð2Þ
as the target, the lane change driving state under dif- where: ΔS is the initial longitudinal relative distance
ferent acceleration, and the following driving state. between the host vehicle and the adjacent vehicle at the
Three driving states are required to meet the vehicle start of the lane change; S H and S A are the longitudinal
driving stability conditions and the lane change, displacements of the host vehicle and the adjacent ve-
and the following driving state are required to meet hicle from the start of the lanechange to the completion
the collision safety restriction conditions. Vehicle lane of the lane change, respectively; L is the length of the
H
change process, the current lane change vehicle and host vehicle, W H is the width of the host vehicle, and θ
the target lane vehicle travel trajectory in time and istheangle between thebodyofthehost vehicle andthe
space close to each other, there will be a collision. horizontaldirection atthetimeoflanechange.
Therefore, it is a very important part to establish a Here we consider that the automatic vehicle completes
reasonable collision safety distance model to study the the lane change with a constant longitudinal acceleration,
relative states of two vehicles on their respective tra- and considering the driving comfort [24], we set −2 m/
jectories from the moment they start lane changing s2≤a M ≤2 m/s2, where the acceleration is zero and the
to the moment they finish lane changing. Based on automaticvehiclecompletesthelanechangeataconstant
the relative speed of the lane change vehicle and the longitudinalspeed,soEq.(2)canberewrittenasfollows:
target lane vehicle as well as the relative distance be-
tween the two vehicles and other parameters, the col-
ΔS⩾S
A
−S
H
−L
H
þL
H
cosθþW
H
sinθ¼
ð3Þ
lision safety distance model is established by
V
A
t−V
H
t−0:5a
H
t2−L
H
þL
H
cosθþW
H
sinθ:
calculating the minimum safety distance at the critical
FromEqs.(2)and(3),wecangetthecriticalminimum
collision point.
safety distance between two vehicles without collision
When the automatic vehicle performs the lane change when lane change occurs, which we name as Min c( S
1
),
behavior, it is assumed that the adjacent vehicle travels
that is, at the initial moment of lane change, the relative
along trajectory 1 and the host vehicle travels along tra- distance ΔS between two vehicles satisfies the following
jectory 2 in Fig. 3. Among them, trajectory 1 is a
equation, and the two vehicles can avoid collision during
straight-line driving, and trajectory 2 is selected as a
lane change.
polynomial lane change trajectory model [23]. The body
lengths of the two vehicles are also taken into account, MinðS Þ¼ Max½V t−V t−L þL cosθþW sinθ(cid:2):
c 1 A H H H H
and the collision occurs when the two vehicles travel to ð4Þ
the position in the figure. Let point A be the collision
point, by studying the relationship between the position Vehicles in the process of changing lanes, the mini-
of two vehicles from the moment of starting lane change mum safe distance on the formula (3) as a judgment of
Fig.3Sceneofvehiclelanechanging
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page6of12
the risk of collision between the two vehicles is not rea- In addition to the driving safety risks mentioned
sonable, in the actual driving process will be dangerous, above, an actual vehicle behavior decision framework
therefore, we set aside a certain safe workshop distance should also consider the following decision attributes in
for the automatic vehicle after changing lanes. When the the context of safety: travel efficiency and lane occu-
host vehicle changes to the target lane, as the two vehi- pancy. The travel efficiency is based on the comparison
cles follow the driving at a smaller relative speed, we of the current travel speed of the autonomous vehicle
consider here that the distance between the two vehicles with the desired travel speed of the vehicle. To achieve
is linearly related to the speed of the lane-changing ve- the optimal choice of automatic vehicle behavior under
hicle, thus establishing the safe distance model after lane different vehicle interaction scenarios, this paper intro-
changing: duces an energy efficiency function U based on the
evaluation of safety, efficiency and lane availability,
Min c ðS 2 Þ¼V A t d þD 0 : ð5Þ whereU 1 reflectstheassessmentofvehicledrivingsafety
risk, and U and U are judged from driving efficiency
Where: Min c(S
2
) is the safety distance after lane
and lane oc
2
cupancy
3
. Through the analysis of the above
change; t d is the braking delay time of F A vehicle, gener- three indicators, an assessment of the rationality of the
ally take 1.2~2 s; D is the psychological safety distance
0 automated vehicle behavior can beachieved,andwe set:
of the front vehicle completely stop, generally
(cid:1)
take2~5m. V =V ; if V <V ;
U ¼ H set H set ð8Þ
The minimum safety distance model established by 1 1; if V ≥V :
H set
the integrated vehicle lane change critical collision point
and the post-lane change safety distance model is used Where: V H indicates the actual speed of the vehicle
to obtain the minimum safety distance model required and V set indicates the set ideal speed of the automatic
forsafe lanechange: vehicle.
The closeness of the distance between the automatic
Min
c
ðSÞ¼ Min
c
ðS
1
Þþ Min
c
ðS
2
Þ: ð6Þ
vehicle and the target vehicle can reflect the degree of
danger in the process of driving the vehicle, here, the
In the case where the automatic vehicle maintains the safety distance model Min(s) is chosen as Min c(S) and
lane without changing lanes (the vehicle performs the Min f(S) respectively according to the vehicle behavior,
following behavior), we establish the following model,
lane-changingorlane-keeping.
and the automatic vehicle needs to maintain a safe fol- 8
lowing distance with the vehicle ahead, and the distance < MinðSÞ−ΔX;
between the two vehicles should be greater than the U ¼ ΔX; if ΔX < MinðSÞ; ð9Þ
2 :
minimum safe distance of the vehicle ahead under 1 if ΔX≥ MinðSÞ:
normal braking and emergency braking. Normal brak-
ing distance refers to the braking distance of the ve- Equipped with on-board GPS and front/rear/left/right
hicle ahead under non-emergency conditions in the radar and high-performance sensors, the autonomous
following process. Emergency braking distance refers vehicle can detect the driving speed of neighbouring ve-
to the displacement of the vehicle in front of you hicles within 360 degrees of the vehicle and the relative
when you need to brake urgently. The safe distance position information with its own vehicle. Using the
for a vehicle to follow the vehicle ahead to avoid col- sensing ability ofthe automatic vehicle,the externaltraf-
lision can be defined as: fic environment information is extracted, combined with
the lane line information to limit the effective travelling
Minf ðSÞ¼V2 A =ð2a m Þ−V2 H =ð2a m ÞþTV A þL M : ð7Þ area, and the potential passing path is planned based on
the virtual drawn cross grid, dividing the adjacent lane
Where T is the braking reaction time of the driver as well as its own lane into nine areas, which are left,
under the braking situation of the front vehicle, V A is right, front and rear, left front, right front, left rear and
the current speed of the automatic vehicle, V M is the right rear eight potential driving directions of the auto-
speed of the nearest vehicle ahead, and a m is the braking matic vehicle, under the premise of ensuring that each
deceleration speed of the front vehicle. For the braking grid (called driving cell) obtained by equal division can
capacity of most vehicles, the maximum deceleration accommodate the driving vehicles, the longitudinal
speed of the vehicle is generally 7.5∼8m/s2, and the or- length of the grid is set to 9m and the transverse length
dinary braking deceleration speed is generally 3∼4m/s2. is the lane width (3.5m). Each cell obtained after the
The ideal state of the vehicle after following the stable equipartition of the straight lane is shown in Fig. 4.
vehicle is that the front and rear vehicles keep a safe Using the estimation method of cell probability, assum-
shop distanceat alltimes. ing that each vehicle can fall in a cell, two states of busy
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page7of12
Fig.4Situationdistributionoflanesaroundvehicles
and idle are assigned to the cell according to whether fourpotentialbehaviorsarerepresentedbyU A,U B,U C,U D
the vehicle falls in the cell or not, and the busy/idle state respectively. By comparing the energy efficiency values
of three cells of each lane is used to calculate the whole of different vehicle behaviors, the current optimal driv-
lane idlerate asfollows: ingdecision can bejudgedinreal-time.
8
<n
if Laneisbusy; 2.5Lowerlayeractiondecision
U ¼ 3 ð10Þ
3 : The following FSM state transfer table can be created
1 if Laneisfree:
based on the evaluation results of the mid-layer state
machine and the potential behavior nodes in the subse-
Here nisthenumber offreecells inthelane. quent stages. The table defines the rules for vehicle be-
havior transfer, i.e., all potential vehicle behaviors in the
So far, energy efficiency functions based on efficiency,
current state of the vehicle and the next state under dif-
safety and lane availability have been constructed. In the
ferent scenarios and different risk situations. To avoid
process of solving multi-attribute decision problems, we
confusion, the energy efficiency value U obtained from
use weight values to quantify the relative importance be-
theevaluationofpotential vehiclebehaviorsintheprevi-
tween attributes, which also allows both traffic safety
ous section is represented in this table by R. Each poten-
and access efficiency considerations to be considered to-
tial state corresponds to an evaluation value R. For
gether to create a multi-dimensional evaluation method.
example, a scenario is randomly selected to build a be-
The hierarchical analysis is a multi-objective decision
havior transition table that contains three stages after
analysis method that combines qualitative and quantita-
the initial moment, each with four potential behavior
tive analysis methods. The main idea of this method is
nodes, asshowninTable1.
that by decomposing a complex problem into several
Where S represents the initial behavior node,
levels and factors, making a comparative judgement on 0
A , B , C , D represent the four potential behavior
the importance between two indicators, establishing a 1 1 1 1
nodes in the first stage (t1) after the initial moment,
judgement matrix, and by calculating the maximum
A , B , C , D represent the four potential behavior
eigenvalue of the judgement matrix and the correspond- 2 2 2 2
nodes in the second stage (t2), etc. The specific behavior
ing eigenvector, the weights of the importance of differ-
ent solutions can be derived, providing a basis for the
Table1StaticconversiontableofFSM
selection of the best solution [25], we used classicalhier-
archical analysis to determine the decision matrix, giving AssessedValue R A R B R C R D
higher subjective weights to the safety indicators of the PotentialNodes
vehicle, In order to integrate the three indicators more Currentnode
intuitively, with a maximum energy efficiency value of 1 t S A B C D
0 0 1 1 1 1
for each indicator, we multiplied the final weight value t A A B C D
1 1 2 2 2 2
by a scale factor of 3 to obtain the coefficient ω=
B A B C D
1 2 2 2 2
[0.61.680.72].
C A B C D
1 2 2 2 2
X3
D A B C D
U ¼ ω
i
U
i
: ð11Þ 1 2 2 2 2
t A A B C D
i¼1 2 2 3 3 3 3
B A B C D
2 3 3 3 3
The energy efficiency function can be used to reflect
C A B C D
the evaluation of each potential behavior of the auto- 2 3 3 3 3
D A B C D
matic vehicle, and the energy efficiency values of the 2 3 3 3 3
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page8of12
implementation is in the order of vehicle acceleration, visual effect and the sensor authenticity of automatic
right lane change, left lane change and deceleration. If driving vehicles in complex weather, trees and buildings
the vehicle is currently in one of the identified nodes, elements are added on both sides of the road to make
the value of this node is set to 1 and the others are set the scene more like the urban road environment. Ac-
to 0. For example, if A =1, then the vehicleperforms an cording to the four consecutive typical lane changing
1
acceleration behavior at the current moment and B = scenarios randomly selected in Fig. 2 above, eight dy-
1
C =D =0. R , R , R and R represent the results of the namic and free driving automatic vehicles are placed in
1 1 1 2 3 4
evaluation of the vehicle behavior in the next phase. If the traffic scene as the research vehicles, in which the
the highest energy efficiency value for the next phase is prescan’sownvehicledynamicsmodel isadded toallve-
R according to the evaluation of the middle-layer state hicles, in addition, sensors are added to the front of the
2
machine, then R =1, R =R =R =0, and the vehicle simulation model to detect the position and speed of the
2 2 3 4
behaviorperformedisarightlane change. vehicle infront.
The state transition table can be expressed by matrix. Figure 5 is a total traffic scene composed of four con-
According to Table 1, the matrix can be expressed as tinuous static sub-scenes. Due to the changes of sur-
follows: rounding vehicles, the scene of the research vehicle
2 3 changes dynamically. Furthermore, to analyze the ro-
A B C D
1 1 1 1 bustness of our proposed decision model in dynamic
6A B C D 7
6 2 2 2 27 and complex scenes, we set up autonomous vehicles
6A B C D 7
6 6A 2 B 2 C 2 D 27 7 with different penetration rates, this can make the ve-
P¼ 6 6
6 6
A
A
2
2
B
B
2
2
C
C
2
2
D
D
2
2
7 7
7 7
: ð12Þ h
de
ic
c
l
i
e
sio
d
n
rivi
m
ng
od
m
el
or
b
e
et
r
t
a
e
n
r
do
d
m
eal
in
w
t
i
h
th
e s
t
c
h
e
e
ne
c
,
o
a
m
nd
ple
m
x
ak
t
e
ra
t
ff
h
ic
e
6 6A 3 B 3 C 3 D 37 7 scene.
6 4A 3 B 3 C 3 D 37 5 After the traffic scenario is built, a hierarchical finite
3 3 3 3 state machine model can be constructed by running
A B C D
3 3 3 3 MATLAB/Simulink directly through prescan. The finite
Let the current state, i.e., the current behavior node, state machine is divided into three layers, the top layer,
be S′ and the energy efficiency evaluation matrix be R i. themiddlelayerandthebottomlayer,thetoplayerstate
The nextstateScanbecalculated by: machineisused tojudge the scene it isin, itsstateis the
sub-scene divided above, the state transfer condition is
S ¼S0 (cid:3)P(cid:3)RT: ð13Þ judgedaccordingtothesurroundingvehicledistribution,
i
and this scene information is passed to the middle layer
For example, if the current task is at the second node
state machine as the output. The state transfer condition
of the first phase, i.e., C , the current state can be
1 is determined according to the surrounding vehicle dis-
expressedas:
tribution, and this scene information is passed to the
S′ ¼½000100000(cid:2): ð14Þ intermediate layer state machine as output. Each top-
level state machine outputs a scene corresponding to an
And assume that the current scenario under the best intermediate level state machine, which is used to filter
risk assessment conforms to the R , the situation can be out the vehicle potential behaviors with the highest en-
3
expressedas: ergy efficiency value based on the energy efficiency value
calculated from the relative speed and relative distance
R
3
¼½0010(cid:2): ð15Þ
of the surrounding vehicles, and whose state is the best
energy efficiency value of the vehicle potential behaviors
So,the nexttask is:
for each sub-scene. The mid-layer state machine passes
S ¼S0 (cid:3)P(cid:3)RT ¼C : ð16Þ the filtering results as output to the behavior matrix der-
3 2
ivation module. For the underlying state machine, the
We can see from the above that the next task is trans- state information is straight ahead acceleration, straight-
ferred to C , which is the second node of the second ahead deceleration, lane change to the left, lane change
2
layer. The specific planning task is to change the lane to the right, and the state transfer condition is the result
leftatthenextmoment. of the state matrix deduction above, which is converted
into aspecific vehicleactionafter judgement, and finally,
3 Simulation evaluation in typical scenarios the decision information is output to the vehicle dynam-
Prescan is used to build a simulation traffic scene, and a ics model. The self-driving vehicle behavior decision
three-lane road with a width of 3.5m and a length of model is thus basically built, as shown in Fig. 6a of the
300m is designed. At the same time, to increase the decision framework execution process. The whole
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page9of12
Fig.5Prescansimulationexperimentscene
simulation model includes the traffic environment mod- lanes in the same direction; (b) The energy efficiency as-
ule, vehicle dynamics module, vehicle state output mod- sessmentchartoftheegovehicleunderdifferentaccelera-
ule, GPS inertial navigation radar module, control tions in different lanes and the optimal point obtained by
strategy execution module and speed control module. thedecisionmethod(d)Path-speedplanningresultsbased
The simulation model framework shown in Fig. 6b is onthe optimal point,c-1,c-2,c-3,c-4arethe lateralpos-
obtained. ition, longitudinal position, speed and acceleration
According to the above-built simulation traffic scene, respectively.
the driving results of the automatic vehicle based on the Figure 8 shows that the main vehicle runs normally in
finite state machine decision are verified, as shown in three lanes in the same direction, and the initial speed is
Fig. 7 below. During the driving process, the vehicle en- 21m/s.frontvehicle aand right-frontvehicle Bdrive ata
suresitsownsafetyandstabilitythroughaseriesofdeci- constant speed of 18m/s without acceleration. Consider-
sionssuch aslane change, acceleration,deceleration,etc. ing the large relative speed between the main vehicle
Two typical scenarios in Fig. 2 above are selected for and the vehicle in front, the main vehicle attempts to
analysis,andthesimulationresultsshowninFigs.8and9 change the current state to ensure the expected speed of
areobtained,andmainlyinclude:(a)Trafficsceneofthree 23m/s. It can be seen from Fig. 6 that the vehicle
Fig.6Schematicdiagramofthesimulationestablishment.aFSMmodelarchitecture.bSimulationmodelframework
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page10of12
Fig.7SimulationresultofVehiclebehaviouraldecisions.aAutomaticvehicletrajectory.bAutomaticvehicledecisionpoint
generates decision point 1. According to the energy effi- speed of 18m/s without acceleration signs. Considering
ciency assessment diagram in Fig. 8b, the main vehicle therelativespeed andrelative position betweenthe main
can turn left to achieve the highest energy efficiency in- vehicle and the vehicle in front, the main vehicle should
come. The planning results are shown in Fig. 8c, the change the current state to reduce risks and ensure
host vehicle completes lane change with an acceleration safety. Ascanbeseenfrom Fig.7above,thevehiclegen-
of 2 m/s2. After lane change, the driving speed reaches erates decision point 5. According to the energy effi-
24.5m/s. The results of longitudinal displacement and ciency assessment diagram in Fig. 9b, the main vehicle
transversedisplacementareshowninthefigure. can achieve the maximum energy efficiency benefits by
Figure 9 shows that the main vehicle runs normally in taking appropriate deceleration. The planning results are
three lanes in the same direction, and the initial speed is shown in Fig. 9c, the main vehicle decelerates and fol-
21m/s. vehicle A in front of the left, vehicle B in front lows the vehicle with an acceleration of −2 m/s2. After
and vehicle C in front of the right drive at a constant the following behavior is completed, the driving speed
Fig.8Simulationresultofnormaldrivingscenario.aRoadscene.bEnergyefficiencyassessmentmap.cTrajectoryplan
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page11of12
Fig.9Simulationresultofnormaldrivingscenario.aRoadscene.bEnergyefficiencyassessmentmap.cTrajectoryplan
reaches 18 m/s. The results of longitudinal displacement decision-making considering only the safe distance, the
andtransversedisplacementareshown inthefigure. transmission efficiency is improved by 16.7%. This paper
focuses on the analysis of optimal decisions made by au-
4 Conclusion tomated vehiclesinthefaceofcomplextrafficsituations,
This paper presents an automatic decision-making sys- but the current approach has certainlimitations that will
temetic framework for vehicle behaviour based on hier- be addressed in future work: 1) the specific trajectory
archical finite state machines. The entire state machine and speed planning of vehicle lane changes are not ana-
decision framework is divided into three layers. The top lyzed and calculated; 2) the weight distribution of the in-
layer state machinedeterminesthe scenario inwhich the dicators needs to be more reasonable. In future work,
main vehicle is located based on information about the we will further study vehicle trajectory prediction as well
surrounding vehicles. The middle layer state machine as trajectory tracking, and more in-depth research on
uses an improved energy efficiency function to evaluate the weight selection of indicators, and consider using
the energy efficiency values of potential vehicle behav- game theory to analyze each indicator to improve our
iour and determine the optimal energy efficiency value. decision and planning framework, so that the framework
The lower layer state machine combines the state trans- decision is more accurate, safe and efficient, and it is
fer matrix to derive the optimal driving strategy for the more in line with the thinking logic of drivers in actual
autonomous vehicle at the next point in time. The deci- driving.
sion framework proposed in this paper is based on au-
Abbreviations
tonomous vehicles equipped with high performance
MDP:MarkovDecisionProcess;POMDP:PartiallyObservableMarkovDecision
sensors that can flexibly adapt the vehicle driving strat- Process;FSM:Finitestatemachine
egy to the surrounding environment to cope with chan-
Acknowledgements
ging traffic conditions in real driving situations. The
TheauthorswouldliketoappreciateMr.LonghaoYanforhiswritingadvice
simulation results show that the proposed self driving andMr.TongtongShifortheguidetoimprovethequalityoffigures.
vehicle behavior decision-making framework can achieve
Codeavailability
correct decision-making in complex road scenes, com-
Thesoftwareapplicationinformationandcodethatsupportthefindingsof
prehensivelyconsiderdrivingsafetyandtrafficefficiency, thisstudyareavailablefromthecorrespondingauthoruponreasonable
and select the best driving strategy. When the main ve- request.Correspondingauthors:PingWang(wang0372@e.ntu.edu.sg).
hicle is in the speed position with the surrounding vehi- Authors’contributions
cles to ensure safe driving and the main vehicle does not XuanyuWangcontributedtotheresearchconception,designedthepaper
reach the expected passing speed, in our decision- structureandcompletedthemanuscript;XudongQiperformedthePrescan
andMATLABexperimentandparticipatedinwritingthepartoftheanalysis
making process, we can select the path and speed most
oftheexperimentalresults;PingWanghelpedperformedthemethod
in line with the expected speed. Compared with the design,paperstructureplanningandlanguagewritingformwith
Wangetal.AutonomousIntelligentSystems (2021) 1:10 Page12of12
constructivediscussions;JingwenYangperformedthemanuscript 13. S.Ulbrich,M.Maurer,inIntelligentTransportationSystems-(ITSC),201316th
preparationandcharting,helptocalculateanddeducethepartofthe internationalIEEEconferenceon,IEEE.ProbabilisticonlinePOMDPdecision
energyefficiencyfunctionmodel.Theauthor(s)readandapprovedthefinal makingforlanechangesinfullyautomateddriving(2013),pp.2063–2067
manuscript. 14. B.Vanholme,D.Gruyer,B.Lusetti,S.Glaser,S.Mammar,Highlyautomated
drivingonhighwaysbasedonlegalsafety.Intell.TransportationSyst.IEEE
Funding Trans.14(1),333–347(2013)
ThisworkwassupportedbytheNationalKeyResearchandDevelopment 15. L.Fletcher,S.Teller,E.Olson,D.Moore,Y.Kuwata,J.How,etal.,TheMIT–
ProgramofChina(2020YFB1600400),KeyResearchandDevelopment Cornellcollisionandwhyithappened.J.FieldRobot.25(10),775–807
ProgramofShaanxiProvince(2020GY-020)andSupportedbythe (2008)
FundamentalResearchFundsfortheCentralUniversities,CHD 16. J.Yang,P.Wang,W.Yuan,etal.,Automaticgenerationofoptimalroad
(300102320305). trajectoryfortherescuevehicleincaseofemergencyonmountainfreeway
usingreinforcementlearningapproach.IETIntell.Transp.Syst.15,1142–
Availabilityofdataandmaterials 1152(2021)
Thedatathatsupportthefindingsofthisstudyareavailablefromthe 17. L.Zhao,R.Ichise,Y.Sasaki,L.Zheng,T.Yoshikawa,inIntelligentvehicles
correspondingauthoruponreasonablerequest. symposium,IEEE.Fastdecisionmakingusingontology-basedknowledge
base(2016),pp.173–178
Declarations 18. M.Montemerlo,J.Becker,S.BhatJr.,TheStanfordentryintheurban
challenge.J.FieldRobot.25(9),569–597(2008)
19. J.Ziegler,P.Bender,M.Schreiber,Makingberthadrive—Anautonomous
Ethicsapprovalandconsenttoparticipate
journeyonahistoricroute.Intell.TransportationSyst.Mag.IEEE6(2),8–20
Notapplicable.
(2014)
20. T.Gindele,D.Jagszent,B.Pitzer,R.Dillmann,inIntelligentvehicles
Consentforpublication
symposium,IEEE.DesignoftheplannerofTeamAnnieWAY’sautonomous
Notapplicable.
vehicleusedintheDARPAUrbanChallenge2007(2008),pp.1131–1136
21. A.Kurt,U.Ozguner,Hierarchicalfinitestatemachinesforautonomous
Competinginterests mobilesystems.Control.Eng.Pract.21(2),184–194(2013)
Theauthorsdeclaredthattheyhavenoconflictsofinterestinthiswork.
22. S.Ma,G.Gong,L.Han,X.Song,in2008Asiasimulationconference-7th
internationalconferenceonsystemsimulationandscientificcomputing.
Received:3June2021Accepted:22October2021
Militarytaskprogrammingbasedonfinitestatemachine(FSM)decision-
makingmodel(2008),pp.1416–1420
23. Q.H.Do,H.Tehrani,S.Mita,M.Egawa,K.Muto,K.Y.Oneda,Humandrivers
References
basedactive-passivemodelforautomatedlanechange.IEEEIntell.Transp.
1. S.I.Oh,H.B.Kang,Fastoccupancygridfilteringusinggridcellclustersfrom Syst.Mag.9(1),42–56(2017)
LIDARandstereovisionsensordata.IEEESensorsJ.16(19),7258–7266
24. L.Jin,V.Bart,S.Yang,etal.,Safetylanechangemodelofvehicleassistant
(2016) drivingonhighway.J.JilinUniv.Eng.Technol.39(3),582–586(2009)
2. S.Sivaraman,M.M.Trivedi,Dynamicprobabilisticdrivabilitymapsforlane
25. S.Wu,Researchontheriskassessmentalgorithmforaccountinginformation
changeandmergedriverassistance.IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst.15(5),
systembasedonanalytichierarchyprocess,SeventhInternationalConference
2063–2073(2014)
onMeasuringTechnologyandMechatronicsAutomation(2015)pp.934-
3. G.Yang,P.Wang,W.Han,etal.Automaticgenerationoffine-grainedtraffic
937.https://doi.org/10.1109/ICMTMA.2015.346.
loadspectrumviafusionofweigh-in-motionandvehiclespatial–temporal
information.Computer-AidedCivilandInfrastructureEngineering.
4. W.Yuan,P.Wang,J.Yang,Y.Meng,Analternativereliabilitymethodto Publisher’s Note
evaluatetheregionaltrafficcongestionfromGPSdataobtainedfrom SpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaimsin
floatingcars.IETSmartCities.3(2),79–90(2021) publishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.
5. P.Wang,Y.Zhang,S.Wang,L.Li,X.Li,Forecastingtravelspeedinthe
rainfalldaystodevelopsuitablevariablespeedlimitscontrolstrategyfor
lessdrivingrisk.J.Adv.Transp.2021,ArticleID6639559,13pages(2021)
6. S.Brechtel,T.Gindele,R.Dillmann,inProceedingsofthe30thinternational
conferenceonmachinelearning.SolvingcontinuousPOMDPs:Valueiteration
withincrementallearningofanefficientspacerepresentation(2013),pp.
370–378
7. J.Wei,J.M.Dolan,J.M.Snider,B.Litkouhi,inRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),
2011IEEEinternationalconferenceon,IEEE.Apoint-basedMDPforrobust
single-laneautonomousdrivingbehaviorunderuncertainties(2011),pp.
2586–2592
8. S.Brechtel,T.Gindele,R.Dillmann,inIntelligentTransportationSystems
(ITSC),2014IEEE17thinternationalconferenceon,IEEE.Probabilisticdecision-
makingunderuncertaintyforautonomousdrivingusingcontinuous
POMDPs(2014),pp.392–399
9. S.Brechtel,T.Gindele,inProceedingsofthe30thInternationalconference
onmachinelearning.SolvingcontinuousPOMDPs:Valueiterationwith
incrementallearningofanefficientspacerepresentation(2013),pp.
370–378
10. M.Bojarski,D.D.Testa,D.Dworakowski,Endtoendlearningforself-driving
cars.arXiv:ComputerVisionandPatternRecognition(2016)
11. F.Codevilla,M.Müller,A.López,V.Koltun,A.Dosovitskiy,End-to-enddriving
viaconditionalimitationlearning.2018IEEEInternationalConferenceon
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),(2018)
12. P.Wang,W.Hao,Y.Jin,inIEEEtransactionsonintelligenttransportation
systems.Fine-grainedtrafficflowpredictionofvariousvehicletypesvia
fusisonofmultisourcedataanddeeplearningapproaches.https://doi.org/1
0.1109/TITS.2020.2997412